Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Wabson to
the MGN by Doctor Kristen Gosi. She's an award-winning
author and professor and chair of Russian and East
European Studies at the University of Pennsylvania. She is
the author of Many different books, but today we're
going to talk about why women have better sex
and socialism and other arguments for economic independence. So,
Doctor Goy, welcome to the show. It's a pleasure
to everyone.
Thanks so much for inviting me.
OK, so let me start by asking you because
uh I imagine that some people will be taken
aback by the title of your book. So what
is the its premise?
So, I mean, the basic premise is pretty simple.
It's that when women have Economic autonomy when they
can actually take care of themselves. They live in
a society which supports them and supports their roles
in societies, that they choose their partners, their romantic
partners in particular, out of love and affection and
shared interests or mutual inclinations, rather than the ability
of that romantic partner to pay the bills. And
so, Yeah. Basically, when you are free, uh, in
terms of you're not worrying about whether you have
enough food to eat, or whether, you know, you
don't have a place to live or whether, you
know, you can survive and see the doctor or
see the take care of your children, you're going
to make a different set of choices. You're essentially
more free in your life. And you're going to
choose your partner on a different set of criteria
rather than in a society where you have very
limited rights and the only way that you can
guarantee a basic social safety net is to find
a partner who has a lot of money and
is willing to spend it on you and your
children.
Mhm. So, uh, I also want to ask you
about the specific definition here, which I think is
important because in the book, you talk a lot
about the social impacts of the political and economic
transition from state socialism to capitalism in Eastern European
countries. So what is state socialism?
Yeah, so that's a kind of a clunky term,
um, that I had to use because originally when
this book was written, it was during the first
Trump administration, and it was for a largely American
audience. I had absolutely no idea at the time
that it would, like, have 15 translations, and then
I would have to be explaining my terminology to
um people who know better. But so because Americans
don't understand socialism generally speaking. And so the reason
I use the term state socialism in the book
was specifically to distinguish between the 20th century socialist
countries in Eastern Europe, what they themselves would have
called really existing socialist countries, versus the democratic socialist
countries of of Scandinavia. And these are countries where
you still have much more of a market in,
you know, sort of more of a like kind
of a market socialism sort of thing going on,
but you also have guaranteed democratic freedoms and a
parliamentary system with free and fair and open elections,
which was a different system than existed in Eastern
Europe. So it was a way of trying to
distinguish between what was going on in Eastern Europe
and what was going on in Scandinavia. Um, BUT
essentially, the, the reason I use this term, and
I think it's very important for the Marxists among
people, um, among your listeners, is that if you're
a very orthodox Marxist, you understand that socialism is
a transitory stage between capitalism and ultimately communism. And
so countries in Eastern Europe, with a very few
exceptions were led by communist parties. So they called
themselves the Bulgarian Communist Party, right? With the exception
of Eastern Germany, which was the Socialist Unity Party,
but most of them were communist parties. People identified
as communists and the West, we tended to call
them communists because that was a scarier word, but
they themselves admitted that the stage of of of
history that they were in was socialism. And so
they recognized that communism nowhere had been achieved. Communism
was the goal, but socialism was the reality. And
so I wanted to make it very clear, particularly
because this was a historical moment when Bernie Sanders
And this was before Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez. This was really
Bernie Sanders' moment, uh, where people understood socialism to
mean Bernie Sanders, which is a very different thing
than what was going on in Eastern Europe at
that time. So state socialism was a term that
I used to name this uh form of socialism
as it existed in Eastern Europe in the 20th
century.
OK. So in the countries where state socialism operated,
what would you say are some of the main
ways in which the lives of women differed from
what we tend to see in capitalist countries?
Right. So, I mean, and there are so many
ways that it's gonna be really hard. To do
this in a short period of time. Because, look,
for the first, in the first case, right? There
was from the very beginning, and we're, we're not
even talking about state socialism in Eastern Europe now.
We're talking about utopian socialism in France in the
late 18th and 19th centuries, where the socialism and
women's emancipation were always connected, going all the way
back to Flora Tristan. And certainly angel and certainly
people like Alexander Colonai and August Bebel in Germany.
Everybody understood that socialism, women's emancipation was a key
component of socialism. And so what happens in the
Eastern bloc is that from the very get-go, from
the founding, the, the Bolshevik revolution in, in 1917
and on, um, and then the founding of all
of these people's republics after World War II in
the East European states. Everybody understood that women's emancipation
had to be achieved through a certain set of
policies, and what that meant in reality was that
women joined the labor force in much higher numbers
at a much earlier period of time than they
did in the West. It meant that governments invested
very, very heavily in women's professional education and training,
and also made sure that they had employment opportunities,
then at a comparable period of time in the
West. There are so many statistics that I could
show you about, like, for instance, the number of
engineers in the Soviet Union versus the number of
engineers in the United States in like the 70s.
It would be like below 100 compared to like,
thousands um in the Soviet Union. So, that was
the first thing. But then the second thing, and
this is a very important point. Is that they
understood that women had childcare responsibilities, that women had
socially reproductive responsibilities in the home as well as
their primary labor responsibilities in society. And so starting
really in the Soviet Union with Alexandra Kalonai, who
was initially the commissar of social welfare and then
later became the head of the women's section of
the Communist Party, they instituted a series of very
interesting policies. That allowed for the creation of kindergartens
and crushes, that allowed for the socialization of much
housework, that would be public cafeterias, public canteens, public
laundries, massive investments in public transportation. Designing architecture so
that all of the amenities that a woman would
need in order to take care of her home
or within walking distance of her place of residence.
There were a whole series of policies put into
place to support women's roles as both mothers and
workers. In the West, there was nothing. Not only
were women, you know, forced to stay home, they
were economically dependent on their husbands, and they didn't
have any of these amenities or services. I mean,
in the United States, many of our top universities
actually didn't allow women to attend them until very,
very late. So it was only during World War
II. That women were allowed to go into the
labor force because all of the men were fighting
on the front lines. But as soon as the
war was over and the soldiers started coming home
in West European and American in Western European and
North American contexts, women were. Basically shoved back into
the home to take care of the kids and
cook the meals and be surrounded by their fancy
shiny new appliances, whereas in the Soviet Union and
in the Eastern bloc countries, women became full members
of society in the Soviet Union. Many women fought
in the military during the Second World War. So
it was an entirely different conception of gender and
gender roles. And finally, and I think this is
a point that doesn't get discussed often enough, is
that in these countries, women usually had lower retirement
ages. So in a country like Bulgaria, women, if
you had 2 or more children, you retired at
50. Most women, if you had, you know, 1
child or 0, you retired. 55, whereas men usually
retired at 60. So, there was also a way
in which women's labor in the home was recognized
as labor, and it was compensated directly in, um,
monetary terms, but more importantly, through these sort of
transfers of all of these extra amenities in society
that supported women and also with a lower retirement
age.
OK, but of course, these countries were not perfect
when it came to women and how they how
they dealt with women, they failed women in different
ways. I mean, just to mention a few examples,
they failed to include the concern for same-sex couples.
Abortion served as a primary form of birth control
in certain countries, at least where it was available.
Uh, MEN, even though they tried to be involved
in things like housework and childcare, uh, they resisted
challenges to traditional gender roles and stuff like that.
So, could you tell us about those examples and
perhaps give us other examples of ways by which
even state socialist countries failed women?
Sure, yeah, I mean, so the one thing that's
very clear in the book, and I've actually been
criticized for this, is that I don't say that
this was a paradise, right? That, that, in fact,
there were these negative aspects. And um the big
ones, of course, are societal wide, right? You had
consumer shortages, you had travel restrictions, you had the
secret police, you had, there were aspects of the
society that were less than desirable. So, some people
have said, oh well, it doesn't matter if women
were happier, like it was an unfree society. So
that's it the the whole argument is um not
worth having. I think it is worth having because
it's a perfect controlled experiment to show how women's
lives are different between different economic systems, and that's
why I think it's worth going into the data
and actually looking at this example. That being said,
there are some definite downsides. Um, I would say
that, so in not in not in all countries
was abortion available. Uh, IN the Soviet Union during
the, the Stalin period, it was outlawed. It had
been very liberal from 1920. In fact, the Soviet
Union was the first country in the world to
guarantee a woman, uh, first trimester abortion on demand.
It was outlawed in 1936, and then as soon
as Stalin died, it was made legal again. In
Romania, you had abortion until 1966, and then with
Ceausescu's concern about population decline, it was very strictly.
Women's, um, he basically nationalized women's uteruses, and in
Albania you also had a very strict anti-abortion regime,
but in all the other countries, there it was
freely available to a greater or lesser extent. And
um and it is true that it particularly in
the Soviet Union, many women used it as a
form of birth control. Abortion became a very, very
common thing. That was not true in all countries.
Um, EASTERN Germany had hormonal birth control widely available,
and they, um they tried. I've read articles from
the 80s of the East Germans trying to convince
Soviet women to use hormonal birth control. But Soviet
women rejected. They didn't want to use hormonal birth
control when abortion was so easily available. So some
of this is, um, driven by the women themselves.
So if women are choosing to have abortions, that's
a good thing that they're available to them, you
know, that's not a bad thing. Um, AND it's
the irony, of course, is that in, in communist
Poland, women had free, safe access to abortion, and
then as soon as they became a democracy, they
lost that. Um, Sweden got abortion because so many
Swedish women were going to Poland during communism to
get abortions, and basically the Swedish government said this
is really embarrassing that our women have to go
to a communist country to deal with their reproductive
rights, we should liberalize abortion. So, So again, I,
I realized that abortion is a very tricky topic,
but if you believe in the right of women's
bodily autonomy, it is true that these East European
countries were the first to guarantee it, and they
tried to make it available to people when it
was necessary. Um, THAT doesn't mean that it was
ideal or it was perfect. Um, AND yes, it
would have been better perhaps if more women had
used hormonal birth control in the Soviet Union, but
it was their choice, and I think that's something
that needs to be taken into account. What were
the other things? I mean, so there was gender
segregation in the labor force. That was a big
problem, um, in terms of women were generally relegated
to what we would think of as more feminized
sectors of the economy, things like textiles and food
processing, a lot of services. On the other hand,
They were also relegated to things that the communists
didn't value because they weren't manual labor, so they,
they dominated medicine, doctors, nurses, um, they dominated law,
so lawyers and judges were primarily women. They dominated
finance, banking, and Um, you know, sort of, so,
so lots of things that we would consider sort
of high status white collar professions in the West
were dominated by women in the east because real
men did manual labor. Um, AND so it's really
hard to compare east and west. And the other
thing is, as I said, there were these labor
men did generally, there was a wage gap. And
when we think of that in Western terms, we
think, oh well, women got paid less than men
did. But it's complicated in the east because everybody's
employer was the government, and women were receiving a
lot of in-kind contributions that men did not receive.
And so if you actually include those in-kind contributions,
as well as, for instance, lower retirement ages, in
some ways, women were actually paid more than men,
and they were certainly compensated in a way that
made them very independent so that If they got
a divorce or if they were in an unhappy
or abusive or otherwise unsatisfying relationship, they could very
easily leave. So some people would say, Socialism was
bad because the divorce rate was high, right? Women
tended to initiate divorce at a much greater frequency
than they did in the West, particularly during this
time. And, um, but they got remarried faster, right?
Because there was less worry about if that relationship
didn't work out, you could just get another divorce.
It wasn't such a big deal. Whereas for women
in the West, divorce was absolutely devastating financially and
economically, and many women were trapped in unhappy and
abusive or unsatisfying relationships for that reason. So, yeah,
and then finally, I would say that women were
required to work. And um when we have looked
at surveys, and there a lot of surveys were
done for women in the um different Eastern bloc
countries. When women were asked, Even in the 50s,
only 2 or 3% of them said they would
prefer to stay home. So, even though they were
compelled to work, and they were, you didn't really
have a choice to just stay home and be
a housewife, not a lot of people actually wanted
that. So I think that, again, for the West,
we often criticize the east and saying, well, women
didn't have a choice, they were forced to work.
It is true. They were, everybody was forced to.
Everybody was supposed to contribute to the society. Um,
BUT you were also guaranteed a job and you
couldn't get fired. So, you know, there's a, again,
you have to understand, first of all, two things.
One, it's a totally different economic system, so you
can't use capitalist criteria to measure what's going on
over there. And secondly, and this was, I want
to say about same-sex couples. Yes, if you compare
what was happening in the 50s and 60s and
70s in Eastern Europe to what's happening in Europe
in 2025, of course, they were retrograde and horrible.
But let's compare what was happening in the West
in the 40s and 950s, and 60s and 970s
to what was happening there. And in fact, in
places like eastern Germany. They were much more tolerant
of same-sex couples. In Poland, I have colleagues who
do research on this in, in Hungary, in Czechoslovakia.
They were much more open-minded to the idea of
same-sex couples than people in the West. It took
us a lot longer to get there, and that
is well documented. I can give you all sorts
of sources. So again, don't compare present day. With
the past, cause that's not fair, that's anachronism. And
also, try to understand that the criteria that we
use to measure women's success in the West is
going to look very different than what we're talking
about in the East. Finally, and I think this
is a very important point. At no point in
any country that I'm aware of, did they seriously
challenge traditional gender roles. This was a very binary
society. Men were men and women were women. And
when they tried to get men to do, for
instance, housework, or when they tried to get men
to help out around the kitchen, you know, the
kitchen or to do something. Their strategy was to
try to make it a masculine task, right? So,
so, like, for instance, I can give you a
very concrete example of this. So, you know how,
I mean, this is true in most of the
countries that I've been in, is that women tend
to cook in the kitchen, but if there's meat
on a grill outside, it's a man's job to
cook the meat, right? With the fire. Is it
true in Spain?
Uh, IN Portugal, but yes, it's true, yeah.
Yeah, OK, I mean, in, in, in the Iberian
Peninsula, more broadly speaking, right? Like, is it, it's,
it's the case that men grill, right? Why is
that the case? That women do all the other
cooking, but when it comes to like meat and
fire, men do it. So the Bulgarian Women's Committee,
we're like, hmm, that's really interesting because men don't
feel like their masculinity is challenged when they grill.
So are there other things that we can do
to convince men that they can help around the
house? And in Bulgaria, it's very common to drink
um akka, which is this sort of like grappa-like
spirit with salad. And so, when you, when you
are drinking akka, you need maize, and so you
would have a salad. And so it's usually the
woman's job to make the salad. But she said,
but it's men who drink, that this was the
president of the Bulgarian Women's Committee. It's men who
drink Rakka, and it's men who eat the salads.
So all we have to do is give them
a big knife and tell them that women just
don't chop the salad appropriately. It's a man's job.
To, to cut the vegetables for the salad with
this really big manly knife. And then like, we'll
have one less task to do, and it worked,
right? They convinced men to, to chop more vegetables
because if they have the right knife, it was
a very manly thing to do. So what I'm
saying is, in these countries, they used the gender
binary in a way that's very different. Like, we're
in the west very critical of this gender binary.
But in the east, they accepted the gender binary,
and they used it to say, yes, men and
women are different, but their contributions to society are
equally valuable.
So, with the end of the Soviet Union in
the 90s, particularly, what were the main social and
economic changes that occurred with the transition to capitalism?
The whole society fell apart in a very short
period of time. And that means that everything that
had once been state-owned, the state-owned enterprises, were suddenly
either privatized officially, sold to foreign investors, or sold
through voucher privatization to the population. Um, BUT mostly
they were just sold to oligarchs, uh, to insiders
who basically kind of privatized the state. In eastern
Germany is a great case of this, where a
lot of West German investors came in, they basically
destroyed the East German industrial base in a very
short period of time. Germany had massive levels of
unemployment, East Germany, because of the closing of this
industry. And so, the way that this impacted women
is Very specifically. Massive unemployment was a problem for
these new governments, and so they wanted to try
to convince women to not seek re-employment, to just
stay home. And so a lot of women were
basically convinced that aren't you happy now you get
to stay home and be with your kids and
be housewives. In fact, women were very unhappy, and
what you see in all of eastern Germany is
a massive. Birth strike, decline in fertility because women
are just like, oh my God, having children is
now impossible, because in the privatization process, they've shut
down all the kindergartens and the creches. They've shut
down all the canteens and the cafeterias. There's, it's
going to be impossible for me to raise a
family and try to look for work, so I'm
just not gonna have babies. Right now, Eastern Europe,
even now, 35 years after communism, are the fastest
shrinking countries in the world. So, um, so it
was a complete change in society, in the structure
of society, but it also meant that Everything was
about money. From a society where money didn't really
matter, largely because there was nothing to buy. Right?
I mean, these are these are, these are societies
with very few consumer items. There were, there were
a lot of consumer shortages. So even if you
had a lot of money, there, there wasn't really
a lot to do with it. So people didn't,
and, and if you did go to the store,
you could buy the things that everybody else had.
So you couldn't really use money to Distinguish yourself
from everybody else. That was the first thing. So
as soon as '89 comes, suddenly money can buy
everything and people invest a lot more money in
distinguishing themselves as special and different through material possessions.
What that means for women. Is that at a
moment when women are being pushed out of the
labor force, at the same time that they've lost
all these social supports that allowed them to combine
work and family, it's not only that the birth
rate declines, but it's also that women suddenly look
at men as ATMs. And it means that, you
know, a bano up, right? Like, I'm going to
Instead of becoming a judge on some crappy government
salary, I'm gonna, or going to university, I'm gonna
invest in, you know, breast augmentation or plastic surgery,
or dye my hair blonde, or whatever, and get
myself a nice rich oligarch who's gonna take care
of me for the rest of my life. So
there's a really massive change, sea change in society,
where women go from being relatively autonomous and independent
to being Imagined as, you know, basically just accessories
or arm candy for men.
Mhm. But do you think, uh, I mean, do
you think it's fair at least to some extent
to compare when it comes to work, workforce participation,
the labor market, and uh the economic situation of
women to compare these Eastern European countries when they
were state capitalist with contemporary neo-liberal capitalist countries in
any way. And, and if that comparison is fair.
Uh, HOW does it look like?
I mean, so I think. It's important to understand
that they were those countries were like absolutely. Devastated
by neoliberal ideology in the 90s, right? That's what
they got. They, I mean, I've written about this.
I just had a piece in the on diplomatique
just a couple of months ago about how devastating
the economic recession in Eastern Europe was in the
90s because of these neoliberal policies, because of price
liberalization, because of financialization. I can go into a
lot of details about all the mechanisms about what
happened. But, but, so, so, and from the catastrophe
of neoliberalism is what arise, this oligarchy, what you
call state capitalism, right? It was a reaction to
the utter devastation and chaos of the early 90s,
massive levels of unemployment. So much money bleeding out
of these countries, lots of outmigration, because that's the
other thing is that people just left. They didn't
want anything to do with being there, like, go
to the west, go to wherever you could. So,
so it is, it's this transition period, right, where
I think we can see exactly what happens to
women's rights. In capitalism, right? You go from state
socialism, from labor guarantees, and massive social safety nets
to Total liberated free markets for labor and no
social safety nets, and an economic mentality that is
all about enlightened self-interest, right? WHERE women are making
rational economic decisions. ABOUT their bodies and about their
futures, and it turns out that those rational economic
decisions include not having children and include strategically choosing
your romantic partners on the basis of whether or
not they can pay your rent. And that's what
capitalism does. And so, and I and I and
and I and I and I think it's it
it does it in the west too. I think
it does it in the United States as well.
Look at the The whole trad wife thing, right?
Um, IN the United States is there's a sort
of meme of these women like playing Happy Housemaker
on Instagram or whatever. But the whole idea of
that is, I will just be pretty and stay
at home and bake cookies from scratch, and my
husband will go out and work and support me.
Isn't that a better model than you having to
work yourself? Now, to be fair, labor conditions in
the United States in particular suck. So, I don't
blame people for not wanting to work and trying
to get somebody else to pay their rent. But
that puts that person in an incredibly dependent relationship
with the person who's paying the bills. And that
can have all sorts of downstream effects that they
may not understand when they're not as young and
beautiful as they are right now.
So I, I want to ask you, and also
since you mentioned red wives there, I want to
ask you specifically about motherhood. So how is it
dealt with in neoliberal capitalist countries versus state socialist
countries?
Yeah, so I think that in, in a, in
a neoliberal context, um, especially, you know, today, again,
it's always tricky because we're doing anachronistic comparison. We're
talking about 2024 versus like the 20th century. But
um, but motherhood is a choice, right? I mean,
it it it's, it's something it's a decision that
you make, and it's a decision in a neoliberal
context that many women decide not to make, right?
Which is why it look at Southern Europe, right?
Birth rates are through the floor, um. Everywhere in
the in the industrial, Japan, Korea, right? And even
in the United States, are the birth rate is
declining precipitously, even in China, right? Birth rates are
declining. Why? Because in a neoliberal system, Where money
is everything, and everything has economic value. I'm sorry
to say this, but I am a mother, so
I think I'm allowed. Children have zero economic benefit
to their parents. They're just like, you might as
well just dig a hole in your backyard and
throw all your money, time, and attention into that
hole, because that's what a child is, right? From
an economic point of view, right? And so, of
course, in a neoliberal economy, Nobody's gonna have children,
right? Nobody's gonna want children. And the people that
do have children tend to be people who, um,
can afford them. Like, it's a luxury item. Um,
OR it's because they're poor and for one reason
or the other, you know, there were, um, they
didn't have access to birth control or they didn't
have access to abortion or whatever. So, so I
think, you know, there's also this kind of girl
bossary in, in the west about like, you can
have it all. And so the other man, the
other model is, I will have a baby. But
then I will go to work and I will
pay poorer women to look after my child, right?
I will outsource mothering to poor, more disadvantaged people.
So that's the Western model. In state socialism, it
was a very different conception, right, of what a
child was. So going back to Colina in 1917.
Colin Tide believed very strongly that a child is
not just A gift to the parents, it's a
gift to society, and society has an important role
to play in helping to raise that child. Obviously
the parents are always going to be the parents,
but they need help and they need support. And
in every single state socialist country in Eastern Europe,
and many outside of Eastern Europe, by the way,
support for families was part and parcel of the
economic redistribution of surplus. THAT occurred, right? So one
way you took the profits from these state-owned enterprises
and you reinvested them into society, and that meant
reinvesting in the next generation of workers and consumers
and taxpayers and soldiers and whatever, citizens. So, it
was just a completely different way. Of thinking about
the value of other people's children, basically, every person's
child is contributing to the society that we all
live in. And so, therefore, as a society, we
should help people who are bringing children and raising
children into our society. But we don't think that
way in neoliberalism because it's expensive. It costs a
lot of money to support. Mothers. It costs a
lot of money to support families. We know it's
very good for the kids. We know it's very
good for the mothers. We even know it's very
good for the families, but we don't do it
because it costs a lot of money. And it's
so much easier to have that labor, that essential
labor that we need be done for free by
women in the home, which is why trad wives
are such a big thing right now, because the
United States has a birth, um, decline. And, um,
and they're very nervous about this because a shrinking
population means a shrinking GDP. It means fewer people
to buy the crap that you make, you know,
fewer people to buy a new phone every year.
So that means the economy is gonna shrink. I
mean, China has the same worry. Their, their population
is shrinking. Anybody who has a growth. ORIENTED mindset
is gonna worry about population decline. So European countries
generally try to say, OK, we want women to
work because they're contributing to pension payments and they're
paying taxes, but we also want them To have
babies. So we're gonna build crushes in kindergartens, and
we're gonna do paid job protected maternity leaves. It's
another thing that East European countries were absolutely fantastic
at. One or two years of paid job protective
parental leave, if you had a baby, you could
go back to your job, you could leave your
job and go back to your job with no
problem. So, West European countries have sort of followed
that model. But in the United States, because we
don't want to pay for that, we just say,
oh, let's pretend that it's really sexy and cool
to be a trad wife and stay at home
and make lots of babies and bake cookies. And
I think that that's, that's the model, you know,
is that we want women to just go home
and have lots of babies, which is gonna be
a problem in the long run because there might
be women who go home. And then don't have
babies because they're not stupid. Right? If you're being
paid to be beautiful and serene and happy at
home, children are gonna mess up that look. So,
so I, you know, I just think that it's,
um, but it, it explains why. Explains our falling
birth rates, but it also explains this fascination, I
think, with the trad wife.
Mhm. But I mean, on the other hand, and
still on the topic of motherhood, I think this
is something that you didn't touch on when I
asked you earlier about some of the issues that
we have to deal with in former Eastern European
uh socialist countries. Uh, I mean, is, wasn't it
the case that at least in some of them,
there was lots of pressure for women to have
children?
Absolutely. These were very pro-natalist societies. I mean, but
it, it, the pressure was societal. So, so fertility
rates are, are, are fertility patterns in Eastern Europe
were very different from Western Europe. So in eastern
Europe, it was the case in most countries that
you had your children very young, when you were
21, 22, 23. Sometimes you would be living with
still with your parents while you had your children
so that your mother, the usually the mother's mother,
could help with the children. And then, Um, and
then once the child was old enough to go
to kindergarten, then you would move out and continue
on with your career. So women had children in
their, um, in their early twenties when they were
at university sometimes. The other thing was socialist countries.
Incentivize young child, uh, bearing because if you had
a baby, you were more likely to get an
apartment, right? So, so if you wanted to move
out of your parents' house, that was like the
best thing you could do was get married pretty
young and have a baby. And so, yes, there
was, and, and then, you know, the government gave
you newlywed loans. They, there were these, um, you
know, subsidized mortgages for your apartments in places where
you actually owned your apartment like Bulgaria. The government
would actually give you a mortgage, and it was
a very, like 2% uh interest rate, it was
a very little interest rate, but if you had
one child, then it went to like 1.5%. If
you had two child, two children, Then it went
down to almost nothing, and if you had 3
children, it was gone forever, right? Um, IT was
just forgiven. So there were lots of incentives to
have children, absolutely. And to the extent that there
was pressure, It was from the state, yes, but
it was also from people's parents, which is not
different than the West, right? So, so there's a
lot of pressure in the west for for people
to have children as well. It's just that it
wasn't as coercive, but in no country other than
Romania. And perhaps Albania and um The Soviet Union
during those Stalin years, were women prevented from having
access to either pretty reliable birth control or abortion
on demand. And so even though these countries put
a lot of pressure on women to have children,
absolutely, they created a massive social safety net in
order to so that the state could help raise
those children. And B, they allowed women the technology
not to get pregnant in the first place, and
then even if they did get pregnant, again, with
the exception of Romania and Albania and the Soviet
Union between 36 and 55. You could have an
abortion. That's not true of Poland today, right? That's
not true in a lot of states in the
United States today. So, Yes, you're absolutely right. There
was a lot of social pressure to have children,
but there was also the availability of birth control
and abortion. So I don't know how you square
those two things. It was a totalitarian society. I
am not denying that it was a totalitarian society,
but there were authoritarian structures in place. That being
said, I think for the years that those countries
existed, If you looked at comparable situation of women
in countries in the west, women in the eastern
bloc had it way better, and western women at
the time knew it.
Mhm. So I would, I would like to ask
you now about uh the presence of women in
leadership positions and roles. I mean, uh, and before
I ask you about how does it compare between
capitalist and socialist countries, uh, I would like to
ask. Why is the presence of women in leadership
positions important? I mean, why is it an important
indicator to look into when it comes to talking
about women's rights and equality between the sexes?
So here I'm gonna say something perhaps a little
controversial, which is that I don't think it's that
important. Um, AND, and, and, and here's why, because
Margaret Thatcher didn't really help women. She happened to
be a woman, you know, but she was not
a particularly woman friendly woman, right? Um, I can
think of plenty of examples of women, for instance,
that are being put into the second Trump administration
cabinet who are not. Gonna do anything good for
women in this country, right? So, this idea that
somehow if you put women in power, it's going
to be better for women's rights or is a
very western neoliberal ideology. It's like, I, I feel
very strongly about this because I think it's just
wrongheaded to say, oh, well, you know, we had
a woman vice president, so therefore, there's no sexism
in our country. That's just absurd, right? There aren't
policies, structural policies that disadvantaged women, um, because we
have women in high positions of power, or we
have a woman CEO and so therefore, like, the
business world is friendly to women. That's just not
true. It's patently false. So, so, so the premise
here is that in theory, right, if you have
women in power, Um, first of all, they serve
as role role models for younger women. I think
there's something to that. Uh, WHEN we look at,
for instance, math scores. There's a this PISA exam
that is done across the world, particularly in Europe
and the European Union, to gauge the, you know,
level of preparedness in certain topics. And we can
see there was a wonderful paper in 2018 called
Girls Math and Socialism, which shows that girls, there's
a less of a gender gap in former communist
countries in math scores than there are in Western
countries. And a lot of the reason for that
is because there were a lot more women mathematicians
and a lot more women teachers in math, especially
high level math. And um and so I do
think that the role model effect at a more
local level is important to girls. I'm not saying
that that's not important. I do think that there's
something really important when you see a a a
person in a position of power that it's not
always a white man. But that being said, right,
if you take the 1% of our society, the
economic elites, and your goal for greater equality in
your society is to make sure that everybody in
that 1% represents, you know, evenly different genders or
different ethnicities or religions or sexualities or whatever, you're
not dealing with the problem that that's only 1%.
Right? There's 99% of the pyramid that is still
screwed, right? So to me, that's a distraction. Talking
about, you know, women in positions of power. Oh,
well, women weren't the heads of hospitals or women
aren't the heads of universities. I mean, really, you
know, why are we worried about the elites when
we should be worried about society as a whole.
So, So, so, yeah. So I think that there's
a, you know, back in the 70s and 80s,
there was a fair amount of research, for instance,
um particularly around things like the Grameen Bank, right?
Which is when you, if you gave loans to
women, that the, the money was better used than
if you gave it to men, right? That women
tend to spend more on their families, um, men
tend to go out and drink. So, so there
is, there are structural things that have to do
with gender that I don't think we should ignore,
but I don't think, you know, Putting a woman,
I mean, like, um, uh, Marine Le Pen is
gonna do any favors for us, right? Like, that's
just a bizarre, like, oh, the West is so
enlightened because, you know, she's the president of France.
Really? You know, or um in Germany, the the
there's a woman, uh, I can't remember her name
right off the top of my head, who's the
head of the Alternative for Deutschland party. Right? Or
she's a very prominent politician in that party. Like,
you're missing the forest for the trees if you
think that just because there's a woman in charge,
that somehow that's a progressive sign of anything.
OK, I, I get your point, but since people
still take that seriously, do we have good enough
data when it comes to, uh, to what extent
women occupied leadership positions in former uh socialist countries?
Yes, we do. And, and it's um high representation
of women at the local and municipal and oblast
level, and Uh, and less participation, the higher you
go up into the Communist Party. So with the
exception of a few countries, Politburo members generally tended
to be men. That was not true in Bulgaria.
There was a long standing woman Politburo member, Soloraoyeva.
Uh, IN the Soviet Union, um, there were a
few women that were on the Politburo. The central
committees tended to have a fair representation of women,
sometimes under quota systems because they believed in women's
emancipation, but they didn't, I mean, they didn't really
have power, right? A lot of the, because the
power was so concentrated in these socialist countries. Um,
IT'S, you know, it's kind of a show, but
it is in fact true that there were fewer
women in very, very high positions of power throughout
the eastern bloc countries, and where they were in
power. They weren't always nice, right? So, again, this
is the problem, right? It's a, you know, um,
I don't think it's a, it's a good system.
But, but, uh, but your point is a better
point, uh, that I want to address, which is,
so let's not talk about politics. Let's talk about
uh economics. So enterprise directors would, right? Like, so
you would have a hospital and all of the
doctors and surgeons would be women, but the hospital
director, the administrator would be a man. Or you
would have like, um, I read a great dissertation
about the Belgrade Observatory and so these were astrophysicists
and astronomers. All of the, many of the workers
there were women, but the director was always a
man. And, um, and, and so there was this
question of, well, why was that the case? Well,
it was the case that the directorships of these
places, especially state-owned enterprises, were political positions. You had
to be a member of the Communist Party and
you had to be a member of the Communist
Party in very good standing. And, you know, you
had to be willing to play those politics. And
again, this is that interesting chicken or the egg
question, um. Do women not achieve positions of high
authority in economic terms because of sexism, because of
discrimination, or because they just don't want those positions?
Um, AND in the case of, like, for instance,
Solo Dragoeva in Bulgaria, who was a Politburo member,
she was a very long standing, very influential, very
powerful politburo member. Many people described her as a
very power hungry person, right? She cared a lot
about power and she wanted to maintain power. And
so she was willing to play those games, which
are, you know, those are endemic to any, if
you've read Machiavelli, you know, right? High power comes
with a lot of responsibility. And so I just
think there's also the case that whether it's east
or west, again, this may be a controversial position.
Um, I think there are a lot of women
who are just too damn smart to want to
be in a position of authority, right? Um, BECAUSE
it's a pain. I mean, I'm currently the chair
of my department, which is a prestigious, powerful position,
and I hate it. I can't wait to be
done. And so I could pass it on to
the next idiot who wants to be in charge.
I don't like being in charge. I wanna do
my scholarship, I wanna do my work. Being in
charge is Anyway, that's, that's another conversation. But no,
I mean, this is often a point that is
made by, again, Westerners who say, oh well, there
wasn't really gender equality because there weren't as many
women enterprise directors or hospital directors or polar buro
members in the east as there are in the
west, um. First of all, there aren't that many
in the West either. Um, AND if they are
there, it's often because of quotas or DEI which
Trump is currently completely dismantling, right? Attempts to, to
increase the participation of women and ethnic minorities in
positions of power. Um, BUT, but I also just
think that that, you know, you have to understand
like what are we measuring? If we're measuring just
role models, what what socialists cared about, I think
what socialists still care about, right, is the material
conditions of everyday life. And and whether our politicians
are being responsive to the material conditions of everyday
life. I have to say, and again, you know,
I'm gonna get into trouble, but I don't care.
Um, YOU know, back when Bernie and um Hillary
were running against each other in the Democratic primary
in, in 2016, I was completely for Bernie Sanders.
And I had many friends tell me, how could
I say that I was a feminist? How could
I, like, I was an internal misogyny because I
wasn't voting for Hillary, right? And I was like,
no. Hillary, to me, in my mind at that
time, she was reprehensible. She was not, she She,
she represented the worst of neoliberal capitalist politics in
the United States. I would much rather vote for
a socialist man who I, who, who will improve
the material conditions of working people in my country
than just because to see some woman in the
White House, that I'm not interested in just visuals.
I'm interested in actual policies. And I think that
this conversation about Women in positions of power or
ethnic minorities in positions of power, diversity, it, it
misses the fundamental point of what that is trying
to achieve, which is to improve the material conditions
of people's everyday lives. That's what really matters, you
know, and the irony, if you just let me
allow me this one last little rant, I think
the the irony of Trump. YOU know, 2 Trump
is that people, poor working class people in this
country. Believed, actually believed that he was going to
care for them. And, you know, it was so
patently obvious to most of us that he was
just lying through his teeth, right? Um, AND, and
it's not even been 3 weeks, and it's, he's
shown already that he that that that those people
who voted for him are suckers. He has no
interest whatsoever in improving the material conditions of their
lives. And I think that's the fear. In Europe,
in the United States, that this populism, it appeals
to people who feel like they are the losers
of this global capitalist world that we're living in.
Great. So, finally getting into the topic suggested by
the title of your book, why talk about sex
in this context? I mean, what, what does sex
have to do with economics and the economic system
people live under. And in this case specifically, what
would you say are the aspects of women's sexual
needs and sexual lives that you would argue are
more, more fulfilled under a socialist uh socialist system
than a capitalist system.
Yeah, so there are two parts to this question.
So I think sex has to do with everything,
right? Because if you think about it, like, open
a novel, listen to a pop song, look at
advertisements, we're constantly bombarded by sex all the time.
In one form or another, whether it's the song
lyrics or advertising campaigns, or, you know, beautiful people
telling you that you will look and be like
me if you buy this product, right? So we
use sex all the time to sell things, to
convince people to do things, to make decisions about
their lives. So why not use sex to compare
economic systems? That seems to me a perfectly legitimate
project. Um, AND there's a lot of good. Good
scholarship out there by people like Dagmar Herzog and
Agnieszka Kozanska, Katerina Nkova. I could give you lots
of names of people who are looking at sexuality
as a way of measuring the quality of life
in different societies because happy people have. SEX, right?
Um, AND unhappy people don't have any sex, and
that mean, or they, you know, it's like, you
could really, really see how society is starting to
fall apart when your young people are not interested
in having sex. And that's happening, right? So, so
the first thing is, I think there's a legitimate
question here. But the second thing, Is that, instead
of, instead of saying, are women better off because
there's a female CEO or a woman in the
White House, why not ask this interesting question of,
are women better off because they're more satisfied and
happy in their personal lives. They're actually living, they're
flourishing in their personal lives. That's a different sort
of question. And again, it's about the material conditions.
And so the reason that this is important is
because going back all the way to the 19th
century with the work of people like Bebel and
um Engels, and Flora Tristan, and Alexandra Coenta, there
was this really interesting observation that women could not
be free. Politically, economically, or sexually, until they were
considered fully participant full participants in building our society
and not just in being mothers and wives. And
so this link, Colina writes very explicitly about how
capitalism basically makes every woman a prostitute. In a
system where, whether you're getting married, you're looking for
a husband who's gonna support you, or, you know,
whether you're looking for casual relationships that are gonna
provide you some economic benefit, or if you're on
camera selling pictures of your feet to strangers that
you don't know, all of us have become marketized
in a way, including men, I would argue it's
like, it's universal at this point. But, but that
Commodification of every of every relational transaction, first of
all, is diminishing the quality of our relationships. I
believe that very strongly. It's also making it harder
to form relationships because everybody's worried about who's going
to take advantage of me. And everything becomes very
transactional. And finally, because we've lost the ability in
so many ways to actually define for ourselves what
makes us happy. Right? How do we define happiness
in the absence of Instagram and TikTok telling us
all the things that we should want and be
and do if we just sat down by ourselves
to try to figure out what we want, it
would probably be fairly simple things, like spending time
with our family and friends and having good romantic
relationships with our partner or partners, as the case
may be. And so, I think East European countries,
and there's very good evidence to support this, since
my book came out. There have been several subsequent
studies. They have better sex. They had better friends.
They had more parties. They had more fun because
they weren't stressed about paying the rent. They weren't
stressed about having food or not being able to
go see the doctor. They had a level of
Social Security. Now, they didn't have many things to
buy. That's true. They couldn't travel. They, they had
very limited life opportunities. I'm not denying any of
that. But when you look at the ethnographic research
on the quality of everyday relationships between people, one
of the things That comes out over and over
and over again is that people who lived under
socialism, and there are millions of them in the
world today, will say the quality of their relationships
were better when there wasn't so much damn hustle
going on. And I think, you know, a lot
of us think that like, we closed the door
and capitalism stays outside of the bedroom. The capitalism
comes into the bedroom with us. And so if
we really want to talk about the value and
and measure the quality of our life, As an
exercise in imagining a different future, then we, we
can talk about public policy until the cows come
home. But I think the most important thing is
to talk about the quality of our friendships, to
talk about the quality of our relationships with our
family, and to talk about our romantic partners. And
those cause those are the things that everybody cares
about.
Mhm. Right. So, uh, I have two more questions
here. One has to do with the criticism I
read from the social scientist Alice Evans. Uh, SHE
wrote it on Twitter, I think. She basically shared
the cover of your book and then she wrote,
uh, in truth, Maoists and Soviets crush dissent, enabled
famine, turned the blind eye to male violence, and
routinized dangerous abortions. Post-communist countries today are. MA t
ically more sexist, entrenched by patriarchal executives. I, I
mean, first of all, let me just comment that
I think that the first part of the criticism
you would address and you acknowledge in the book
that there were these kinds of problems. And the
second part, I'm not sure if it's really a
valid criticism because she's already talking about post-communist, capitalist
country, so, and that's not your argument in the
book, but anyway, what would be your response?
I mean, look, I get a lot of people,
first of all, it's very clear that she didn't
read the book because I don't talk about Maoism,
I'm not even talking about China, right? Um, IF
she had read the book, I mean, people see
the title and they just react, especially on places
like Twitter, right? Um, AND, and that's true. Like,
many, you know, many people say, oh, well, because
there was a famine, or because there were abortions,
um, it, it doesn't matter. Any of the other
achievements don't matter because this one bad thing, right?
You know, and I, you know, and you could
make that argument about the United States. You say,
well, you know, we had a genocide against the
Native Americans and we had slavery, so it doesn't
matter that we are now the beacon of free,
you know, democracy and freedom in the world. Um,
uh, IT, it's a fundamental, uh, it's, it's a
bizarre sort of critique. So first of all, just
as a Rhetorical position. It's a very strange, it's
like, you know, what about is, right? Um, THIS
idea that like, you can always, there's no political
system that's perfect. That's the first thing. Um, AND
I don't even argue that this political system was
perfect. In fact, I'm very careful in the book
to say and enumerate point by point all the
things that were wrong. So, she didn't read the
book. But the other thing is, I, you know,
I think that Entrenched sexism, yeah, after '89, absolutely
because of capitalism, not because of socialism. So she
basically just agrees with me. She just doesn't know
that she agrees with me cause she hasn't read
the book, right? Um, I think the bigger critique,
though, I mean, if I were to critique myself,
um. Is this question of the state, right? Like
I do I am a believer in the state.
I think that the state, you know, preferably a
democratically elected one that is responsive to its constituents.
Can and should redistribute wealth in order to improve
the material conditions of people's lives. So I see
a role for the state and that and that
book. IS an argument for a state that is
going to take on a lot of these more
socialistic type policies in order to improve people's lives.
And I go to great lengths to explain why
I think that This can be done and should
be done. Um. That being said, I'm not sure
if states are always such a good thing, right?
Because look what's happening in my country right now.
Um, THE dismantling of the state, and, um, and,
and perhaps the weaponization of that state. And so
to the extent that I have very smart colleagues
who are kind of more critical of the state.
Um, THAT'S why I wrote Everyday Utopia, which is
the follow-up book to this one, was to sort
of take uh take quite seriously what we as
people, as ordinary people can do. In the absence
of a state, because I'm not so sure that
the state in the long term is going to
be our state salvation in the way that I
would really love it to be. Um, AND so
to me, my biggest critique of my book is
that it's, it's, it's anachron like in some ways
it is anachronistic, right? That that kind of Sort
of welfare state as it existed, because it existed
in Western Europe too, even existed in the United
States, this really robust redistributive welfare state may have
been a unique product of the 20th century. And
it may be that in our world today, because
of the atomization, because of AI, because of technology,
because of globalization, because of various things that are
just different, qualitatively different than they were 70 or
80 years ago, that that kind of robust welfare
state may just not be possible. Um, AND that,
I mean, that gives me pause. I'm not saying
that I don't think we should still fight for
it. I'm just saying that it gives me pause.
Mhm. So one last question then, how do you
look at current trends in socialism across the world
or in the United States specifically, and the future
of socialism? And are you hopeful about it? Are
you pessimistic? I mean, what's your, what are your
ideas about it?
So it depends on the day. Um, BECAUSE I
definitely tack back and forth. Um, ON the one
hand, I think I, you know, the left is
very good. At criticizing and destroying itself. Um, THAT,
you know, so like in the United States, you
know, these, this sort of whole woke phenomenon where
everything became about a very narrow set of identity
politics to the exclusion of actual concerns for the
material conditions of people's lives, that resulted in the
white working class of the United States voting Republican.
Um, AND I, and I think that's the responsibility
of, of, of leftist leaders in the United States
because they, they hyperfocused on issues that um alienated
the vast majority of working class people in this
country. And that is a problem in many, many
socialist movements. So, so that's a, that's a real
problem. And, and then the minute socialists get into
power, historically, they tend to immediately start fighting against
each other. And so they, they tend to be
very ineffective, right? Because, um, you know, unless, anyway,
there's a, there's a whole kind of interesting psychological
analysis that could be done about this sort of
long-term issue of it, I think that there's a
kind of internal fear of people like Stalin and
Mao, like this heavy-handed patriarchal kind of authoritarian leader.
And so there's this tendency to fracture in ways
that make it very hard to get things done.
That being said, The one time Several times when
socialists have been really effective. Incredibly effective, I would
say, is when there are fascists or right wing
people in power. Because the one thing that socialists
can do and have done is form Popular Front
movements. They're very good at building coalitions when it's
necessary. And so right now, I think we're at
a moment where this sort of more populist right-wing
politics is in ascendancy. It seems like it's sweeping,
you know, this, this sort of strong male dictator
figure that we've seen in the past. Um, THE
one thing that socialists are really good at is
undermining that particular formulation of power by creating broad
Popular Front coalitions. And so as the world changes,
On my better days, I'm actually happy when I
see socialists creating coalitions between environmentalists and feminists, and
anarchists, and, you know, broad spectrum coalitions in order
to get things done. So, So I think, you
know, globally, socialism is still emerging from the hangover
of this 20th century failure of the Soviet Union.
But, but it's receding in time. And so people
like me, but many of my colleagues are basically
trying to go back and do a kind of
postmortem, a debrief and say, OK, those societies didn't
work, but are there things in those societies such
as policies towards women and families that we can
rescue. Get rid of the bad stuff, keep the
good stuff, and um move towards a new kind
of different sort of socialism in the future. You
know, I think there are many things that were
commendable about these societies, their investments in art, their
investments in science, you know, their um concern uh
with obviously women's rights. I mean, there are lots
of things that we can think about the ways
in which they facilitated. Um, SOCIAL mobility and the
ways in which ordinary people had basic sort of
security in terms of healthcare and housing and food
security in a way that we don't have in
the West. So, what are the things that we
could learn? What are the things that we should
definitely not do again? Um, I think that is
a really urgent project for academics, but also, you
know, ordinary people today to educate themselves, not just
to imbibe these Cold War stereotypes about famine and
about, um, you know, uh, you know, waiting in
line to buy toilet paper, right? There are these,
there are these stereotypes that are out there that
completely occlude. Other things that um we might be
able to learn because, like, one of the things
that I do is I read a lot of
documents, for instance, from the 70s and the 80s,
from Western sources who were analyzing social policies and
things that were happening in the Eastern bloc, and
they're so much more objective. Than anything that was
written in the 90s or the 2000s, because of
the victor, you know, to, what is it, the,
the history is written by the victors, right? After
the Cold War, we could go back and say
everything about this was awful. But during the Cold
War, people were actually learning from what the Eastern
Bloc was doing, right? There were a polyclinic systems,
healthcare systems, so much interesting scholarship has been done.
So, From a scholarly perspective, I think there's a
recuperative project, and from a political perspective, I think
we need hope. I think we need hope, and
I think that that the one good thing, as
I said, about leftist politics is in times of
hopelessness. It's often the socialists and the anarchists and
the environmentalists and the feminists. It's often them who
bring the hope. They bring the possibility of change,
and they convince ordinary people that that things can
be changed. And I think that's a really important
role for these social movements. Even if they, you
know, as a percentage of the parliamentary, you know,
representation, they're small, they, they, they punch above their
weight. I, I think about like the Belgian Workers'
Party in Belgium, you know. This is a small
workers' party, um, very socialist, but they are so
important, and they're so respected in that political context,
because they get things done, right? Um, BECAUSE they
live by a set of principles that, that people,
that appeal to people, that people understand, they speak
the language of the people. And so, in my
more optimistic moments, I hope The socialists and social
movements of the left will learn from the past
and also take those lessons and move forward with
hope and positivity for change in the future.
Great. So the book is again Why Women have
better sex and the Socialism and other arguments for
economic independence. I will be leaving a link to
it in the description of the interview. And Doctor
Goy, just before we go, apart from the book,
would you like to reference any places on the
internet where people can find you and your work?
Yeah, so my, uh, website is just www.christenosy.com, very
easy. Um, YOU know, there's links to everything there,
links to articles. Um, MY faculty webpage at the
University of Pennsylvania also has, uh, some links there.
There's a column archive at Jacobin, um, for things
that I've written there. I mean, I, I, I
write pretty broadly, so. Um, THE best place is
just on my, my landing page. I'm not really
a social media person, so I just have a
website.
Great. I will, I will also be leaving links
to that in the description of the interview and
thank you so much for taking the time to
come on the show. It's been really fun and
informative to talk with you.
Thanks so much for your brilliant questions. It was
very, very nice to, to have somebody as a
serious interlocutor.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Matri Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes called Holbrookfield governor
Michael Stormir Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnunseroro and Hal
Herzognun Macha Joan Lays and the Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David Sloan
Wilson, Asila dearraujoro and Roach Diego Londono Correa. Yannick
Punteran Rosmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevskynaleb medicine, Gary
Galman Samov Zaledrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franca Bartolotti Gabrielon Scorteus
Slelisky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith John Wieman.
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai Giorgio
Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, the Augusta,
Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli
Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, Old Eringbo.
Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassy Zigoren, Jeff
McMahon, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner,
Luke Neeson, Chris Stor, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica
Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis,
Valentin Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam
Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula
Gudinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levine,
and Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers.
These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden,
Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedict Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and
Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick
Golden, and to my executive producers Matthew Lavender, Sergio
Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.